* Volume of a tree $\approx$ volume of a cylinder.
* For simplicity, in this microworld, it is assumed that wood that is used for lumber is preserved responsibly such that its potential lifespan in the use phase is maximized. Thus, carbon stored in lumber is not released back into the air in the simulation timeframe. This is a sound assumption to make because if responsibly produced and used, wood can indeed lock away carbon out of the fast carbon cycle for centuries. [(Scion, 2019)](https://www.scionresearch.com/about-us/about-scion/corporate-publications/scion-connections/past-issues-list/scion-connections-issue-34,-december-2019/locking-up-carbon-long-term-in-timber-buildings) In reality however, carbon storage in preserved wood or lumber is not as straightforward. Amount of carbon sequestered in wood products depends on several factors at the wood production, use, and end of life stages. In the production phase, amount of carbon in harvested wood varies depending on the tree type as different species have different wood densities. Hardwood from deciduous tropical species is more dense and hence is preferred to make durable goods. But this demand often leads to irresponsible sourcing of wood which ultimately leads to more carbon being released than what is preserved in wood and accounted for by new growth. If wood is sourced responsibly and preserved such that new growth is encouraged in it's place, then this can result in an increased carbon sink effect even after taking into consideration, emissions involves in transport of the harvested wood and its processing. In the use phase, wood products keep sequestered carbon from re-entering the fast carbon cycle until its end of life when it begins to degrade. At this stage, the best course of action is to recycle it into secondary wood products like a particle board as that would extend its life and keep carbon locked away for longer. This can be beneficial even when considering the energy needed for recycling. Another, less desirable option is to burn it to produce greener energy compared to that produced via burning of fossil fuels. These are however, ideal scenarios. It is an unfortunate truth that a lot of harvested wood end up in landfills in or ever before their end of life stage where they rot quickly and in addition to CO2 may also release more potent green house gasses like methane (CH4). Also, while improving the durability of wood is a good approach to maintaining its role as a carbon safe, several methods of wood modification to make it harder or better suitable to substitute materials like plastic or concrete involves intense processing and use of toxic preservatives like CCA or ACQ which ultimately does more harm than good in terms of energy needed for modification and toxic waste. [(P. van der Lugt, 2020)](https://www.accoya.com/app/uploads/2020/04/Carbon-Storage-Using-Timber-Products.pdf)
* At the initial stage in the simulation, all carbon in soil and vegetation is assumed to be in the air. As plants grow, they capture and store this carbon in themselves and the soil.
* It is assumed that all other growing conditions such as sunlight, water, nitrogen and other nutrients that are not directly involved in the carbon cycle are optimal. Phenomenon like effect of competition, temperature, geography, etc. is ignored.
* Choice of value for TREE_MAINTENANCE_PC is arbitrary.
* In reality, prices of wood can also vary depending on its condition (moisture content, damage proportion, etc.) as well as species and market demand. In the microworld, an average price is assumed with all other conditions being ideal. [(Lost Art Press, 2021)](https://blog.lostartpress.com/2021/03/21/buying-wood-by-the-pound/)
* Effects of harvesting NTFPs and opening forest for recreation not considered.
* Choice of normal distribution for resource availability is arbitrary.