## Vegetation

Carbon is pulled from the air by trees in the microworld.

Let a tree have grown in volume by $\Delta V_t \text{ m}^3$.  Let density of the biomass of the tree be $D_t \text{ g/m}^3$. Then, the tree's weight should have increased by $\Delta W_t = D_t \times \Delta V_t$.  Of the total weight of the tree, around 50% is dry weight [(Ecotree)](https://ecotree.green/en/how-much-co2-does-a-tree-absorb). Thus, $\Delta W_t^{dry} = 0.5 \times \Delta W_t$ The amount of carbon in the new volume of the tree is about 47.5% of it's dry weight [(Ecotree)](https://ecotree.green/en/how-much-co2-does-a-tree-absorb) $C_t^a = 0.475 \times \Delta W_t^{dry}$. This absorbed carbon will get added to the total amount of carbon in the vegetation reservoir and subtracted from the air reservoir. Thus, $C_{vegetation} = C_{vegetation} + C_t^a$ and $C_{air} = C_{air} - C_t^a$.

All the while the tree grows, it would also need to replace biomass lost due to damage or natural shedding. Let this increase in volume for maintenance equal 1 % of its total volume $\Delta V_t^m = 0.01 \times V_t$.  Just as before, $\Delta W_t^m = D_t \times \Delta V_t$, $\Delta W_t^{mDry} = 0.5 \times \Delta W_t^m$, $C_t^m = 0.475 \times \Delta W_t^{mDry}$. This amount of maintenance carbon is subtracted from the air and added to the soil to emulate  the amount of biomass lost being added into the soil's carbon store. This, $C_{air} = C_{air} - C_t^m$ and $C_{soil} = C_{soil} + C_t^m$.

As plants ***DECAY***, some amount of stored carbon re-enters the air and soil reservoirs from the vegetation reservoir.

Once a tree has died and remains on land, 15% of the carbon stored in it is released into the atmosphere and soil per year. [(World Economic Forum)](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/09/decaying-forest-wood-carbon-climate-change-co2/) So, let amount of carbon that is lost during decay each year be fixed at $C_t^d = 0.15 \times C_t$ where $t=$ time right before the tree died. Thus, weight of the dead tree lost to decay would be $W_t^d = 2C_t^d$ and consequently, volume would be $V_t^d = \frac{W_t^d}{D_t^d}$. That is, after each year, volume of a dead tree that remains in soil, changes as $V_t = V_t - V_t^d$.  Amount of volume decayed each time step is set to equal 15% of the volume of the tree at the time of death.

Of the amount of carbon decayed each year, 35% ends up in the soil and 65% is released back into the atmosphere. So, $C_{soil} = C_{soil} \times (0.35 \times C_t^d)$ and $C_{air} = C_{air} \times (0.65 \times C_t^d)$. [(~ reddit, 2021)](https://www.reddit.com/r/askscience/comments/phvr8h/where_does_the_co2_absorbed_by_trees_end_up/)

## Soil
The soil naturally releases a certain portion of stored C into the air through processes like respiration  of microorganisms.

Soils can contain between 30 to 90 tonnes of carbon/ha at 30cm depth. Cultivated soils can lose approximately 3 tonnes of soil carbon/ha/year. [(Farm Carbon Toolkit)](https://farmcarbontoolkit.org.uk/toolkit-page/emissions-from-soil/soil-carbon-emissions/)

Thus, in the microworld, the amount of carbon that the soil releases back into the atmosphere each year is set to $\frac{3}{(90+30)/2} - 1 = 5 - 1 = 4\%$ of the carbon in the soil $C^r_s = 0.05 \times C_s$. Here one was subtracted because this is not cultivated soil and hence likely will not lose as much carbon as cultivated soil. Thus, $C_{soil} = C_{soil} - C_{soil}^r$ and $C_{air} = C_{air} + C_s^r$.

## Lumber

Preserved wood continues to store carbon and lock it away for decades or centuries. [(E. Dunningham, 2019)](https://www.scionresearch.com/about-us/about-scion/corporate-publications/scion-connections/past-issues-list/scion-connections-issue-34,-december-2019/locking-up-carbon-long-term-in-timber-buildings)

50% of harvested timber is used as lumber which locks away the carbon in them.

## Water

The ocean both absorbs and releases CO2. The ocean can be thought of as a carbon reservoir comprised of 3 sub-reservoirs being the "surface waters", the "deep ocean" and "sediments" on the ocean floor.

"Carbon dioxide uptake by the ocean occurs at the sea surface, where it is dissolved from the air into the seawater. Whether atmospheric carbon dioxide dissolves in the water, and the amount dissolved, depends primarily on the difference in ==carbon dioxide partial pressure== between the seawater and atmosphere. Simply stated, this is the pressure generated by carbon dioxide dissolved in the surface water and that in the atmosphere. The natural exchange of gas between the seawater and the atmosphere always works towards a balance of these pressures. This means that surface waters with a lower partial pressure of carbon dioxide than the overlying atmosphere will take up carbon dioxide from the air until the pressure difference is no longer present. The pressure-equilibration process also works in the opposite direction from the water into the atmosphere." [(World Ocean Review 8, 2024)](https://worldoceanreview.com/en/wor-8/the-role-of-the-ocean-in-the-global-carbon-cyclee/how-the-ocean-absorbs-carbon-dioxide/)

Since the amount of $CO_2$ transferred between air and water is dependent on the difference in  partial pressures of the gas in the two reservoirs, both the [[Partial Pressure of CO2]] in air and water must be computed. 

<font color="yellow"><b>Note:</b> Chat GPT 3.5, Gemini AI, and Perplexity AI were used to help arrive at the following quicker. Correctness of suggestions were examined manually. Tweaks were made as and where necessary.</font>

Once CO2 partial pressures are available for both the water and air reservoirs, their difference can be obtained. Now, the amount of carbon to be transferred from the source to sink reservoir needs to be computed based on this pressure difference. This may be done as follows.
1. Compute the equilibrium pCO2 in water based on the water's solubility constant (k) and the air's pCO2 would need to be computed as $P_{CO2}^{equilibrium} = \frac{P_{CO2}^{air}}{k_H}$ where $k_H$ is the solubility constant of CO2 in water as per Henry's Law at 20.5°C.
2. Given $P_{CO2}^{air}$, $P_{CO2}^{water}$ and $P_{CO2}^{equilibrium}$, if $P_{CO2}^{air} < P_{CO2}^{equilibrium}$ and $P_{CO2}^{water} > P_{CO2}^{equilibrium}$ then CO2 flows from water (source) to air (sink). Similarly, if $P_{CO2}^{water} < P_{CO2}^{equilibrium}$ and $P_{CO2}^{air} > P_{CO2}^{equilibrium}$ then it flows from air (source) to water (sink).
3. Once direction of flow is computed. The magnitude is to be computed. This is based on the the difference between pressures $\Delta P_{CO2} = P_{CO2}^{air} - P_{CO2}^{equilibrium} \text{ atm}$.
4. Let the rate of transfer between the reservoirs be defined by a coefficient $k_{water}^{air}$.
5. Flux may then be computed as $F_{CO2} = k_{water}^{air} \times \Delta P_{CO2} \text{ atm}$. Since we've now introduced a transfer coefficient $k_{water}^{air}$, we need to set a good value for this. It is known that "Roughly 10 billion tonnes of carbon are being released into the atmosphere each year, but the ocean quickly absorbs about 3 billion tonnes of these emissions. [(E. Shadwick et. al., 2023)](https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2023/june/oceans-absorb-emissions)". Based on this, a good value for $k_{water}^{air} = 0.3$. But, this may also be some other small value as seen fit within the microworld.
6. Now, using Henry's law, we can obtain the concentration of CO2 associated with the flux as $C_{CO2} = k_H \times F_{CO2} \text{ mol/L}$.
7. Moles of CO2 can be obtained from the concentration as $n_{CO2} = C_{CO2} \text{ mol/L} \times V_{source} \text{ L}$.
8. Now, moles of CO2 can be converted to moles of C. One mole of CO2 has one mole of C. Thus, $n_{CO2} = n_{C}$.
9. Finally moles of C may be converted into grams as $\Delta C = n_C \times 12$ since molar mass of C is 12. This is the amount of carbon that will be subtracted from the source reservoir and added to the sink reservoir.

Here, it is necessary to use the correct value of the solubility constant $k$ in mol/L for CO2 in water at 20.5 °C  = 294.65 K. This can be arrived at, as follows.
* $k(T) = k^{\degree}e^{([\frac{1}{T}-\frac{1}{298.15\text{ K}}] \times d[\frac{log(k)}{d(1/T)}])}$ where $k^\degree = 0.034 \text{ mol/(kg·bar)}$ when T = 25 °C  = 298.15 K. Also here, the temperature dependence constant, $d[\frac{log(k)}{d(1/T)}] = 2400 \text{ K}$.
* Thus, $k(293.65) = 0.038 \text{ (mol/kg)bar}$.
* The surface ocean extends from 0 to roughly 100 meters [(Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution)](https://www.whoi.edu/know-your-ocean/). For every 10.06 meters one goes down in the ocean, pressure increases by about 1 atmosphere. [(NOAA)](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/pressure.html). Thus, average pressure for the surface ocean may be considered as 5 atm.
* At 5 atm, 20.5 °C, and 3.5% salinity [(NOAA)](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/whysalty.html), the density of water is 1.00119 kg/L [(Water Density Calculator, W. Sas, 2024)](https://www.omnicalculator.com/physics/water-density). Given this and 1 bar = 0.987 atm, 1 mol/L.atm = 1.014 mol/L.atm.
* Thus, $k(293.65) = 0.03755 \text{ mol/L.atm}$
