## Vegetation

In the microworld within MycroForest, vegetation refers to the trees. Trees both absorb and emit carbon during growth, biomass maintenance, and decay.

**GROWTH**
As previously discussed, plants absorb carbon from the air in the form of CO2 for photosynthesis. This means that carbon in plant biomass originates from the air. In the microworld, carbon absorbed by a tree each time it grows is computed as the amount of carbon in new growth.

Let a tree have grown in volume by $\Delta V_t \text{ m}^3$.  Let density of the biomass of the tree be $D_t \text{ g/m}^3$. Then, the tree's weight should have increased by $\Delta W_t = D_t \times \Delta V_t$.  Of the total weight of the tree, around 50% is dry weight [(Ecotree)](https://ecotree.green/en/how-much-co2-does-a-tree-absorb). Thus, $\Delta W_t^{dry} = 0.5 \times \Delta W_t$. The amount of carbon in the new volume of the tree is about 47.5% of its dry weight. [(Ecotree)](https://ecotree.green/en/how-much-co2-does-a-tree-absorb) $C_t^a = 0.475 \times \Delta W_t^{dry}$. This absorbed carbon will get added to the total amount of carbon in the vegetation reservoir and subtracted from the air reservoir. Thus, $C_{vegetation} = C_{vegetation} + C_t^a$ and $C_{air} = C_{air} - C_t^a$.

**MAINTENANCE**
Once a tree reaches maximum size, it does not grow further. But both when it is growing and otherwise, as long as the tree is alive, it will also need to replace biomass lost due to damage or natural shedding. The amount of carbon in this biomass that is replaced as part of maintaining life, is referred to here, as maintenance carbon.  This carbon is modelled as being subtracted from the air and added to the soil without levels in the vegetation reservoir increasing or decreasing since the net amount of biomass lost to the soil is more or less same as the amount that is absorbed from the air to replenish it. 
Let the volume of biomass that is replaced for maintenance be equal to 1% of a tree's total volume $\Delta V_t^m = 0.01 \times V_t$.  This proportion of 1% is a number that works well with other existing microworld settings and was arbitrarily chosen as it was not possible to find real-world numbers for this figure. Just as before, $\Delta W_t^m = D_t \times \Delta V_t$, $\Delta W_t^{mDry} = 0.5 \times \Delta W_t^m$, $C_t^m = 0.475 \times \Delta W_t^{mDry}$. This amount of maintenance carbon is subtracted from the air and added to the soil to emulate  the amount of biomass lost being added into the soil's carbon store. This, $C_{air} = C_{air} - C_t^m$ and $C_{soil} = C_{soil} + C_t^m$.

**DECAY**
As plants ***DECAY***, some amount of stored carbon re-enters the air and soil reservoirs from the vegetation reservoir. Once a tree has died and remains on land, 15% of the carbon stored in it is released into the atmosphere and soil per year. [(World Economic Forum)](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/09/decaying-forest-wood-carbon-climate-change-co2/) Thus, amount of volume decayed each time step is set to equal 15% of the volume of the tree at the time of death. Let amount of carbon that is lost during decay each year be fixed at $C_t^d = 0.15 \times C_t$ where $t=$ time right before the tree died. Thus, weight of the dead tree lost to decay would be $W_t^d = 2C_t^d$ and consequently, volume would be $V_t^d = \frac{W_t^d}{D_t^d}$. That is, after each year, volume of a dead tree that remains in soil, changes as $V_t = V_t - V_t^d$.  Of the amount of carbon decayed each year, 35% ends up in the soil and 65% is released back into the atmosphere. [(~ reddit, 2021)](https://www.reddit.com/r/askscience/comments/phvr8h/where_does_the_co2_absorbed_by_trees_end_up/) So, $C_{soil} = C_{soil} \times (0.35 \times C_t^d)$ and $C_{air} = C_{air} \times (0.65 \times C_t^d)$.

## Soil
The soil naturally releases a certain portion of stored C into the air through processes like respiration of microorganisms. The approximate amount of carbon in the soil is 2300 Gt. Around 60 Gt of carbon is lost per year [(H. Riebeek, 2011)](https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/features/CarbonCycle). Thus, in the microworld, the amount of carbon that the soil releases back into the atmosphere each year is set to $\frac{60}{2300} \times 100 = 30\%$ of the carbon in the soil. Therefore, annual soil carbon release $C^{r}_{soil} = 0.03 \times C_{soil}$ such that on each time update of 1 year, $C_{soil} = C_{soil} - C_{soil}^r$ and $C_{air} = C_{air} + C_{soil}^r$.

## Lumber

Preserved wood continues to store carbon and lock it away for decades or centuries. [(E. Dunningham, 2019)](https://www.scionresearch.com/about-us/about-scion/corporate-publications/scion-connections/past-issues-list/scion-connections-issue-34,-december-2019/locking-up-carbon-long-term-in-timber-buildings)

50% of harvested timber is used as lumber which locks away the carbon in them. [(University of Wisconsin, 2020)](https://www3.uwsp.edu/cnr-ap/KEEP/Documents/Activities/Energy%20Fact%20Sheets/FactsAboutWood.pdf)